# 1.0 RC 2

This changelog summarizes new features and breaking changes in EdgeDB 1.0 Release Candidate 2 “Lacaille”.

## Migrations

We continue fixing bugs that affect schema definitions and migrations. The most notable changes involve static cardinality inference, so that computed links and properties can be defined to mimic their regular counterparts:

## EdgeQL

## GraphQL

## Configuration

A lot of the configuration settings used to be strings that simply mapped to Postgres settings. We now use more appropriate types for expressing configuration values: bool, int64, duration, in addition to str.

We also introduce a new scalar cfg::memory to represent size of various memory storage in a clear and unambiguous way.

## Bindings

We now have the client abstraction superceding the connection and pool abstractions. There’s no conceptual difference between a pool of size 1 and a single connection, so we decided that the API should reflect that. So we introduce a single concept of client to send queries to the database and let this client encapsulate the handling of concurrent connections.

We’re making our binding more robust by adding “retry options” to our interface. What it means is that read-only queries and all transactions can be automatically retried in case of certain kinds of errors (such as network errors) without the need for any extra code on the part of the developers. This also means that we no longer have “raw” and “retrying” transactions in the APIs, but all transactions are retrying. To get the same behavior as for “raw” transactions the maximum number of attempts can be explicitly specified as 1.

We’re also in the process of cleaning up our APIs and removing the deprecated functions.

## Environment variable renames

For clarity and simplicity, several environment variables have been renamed and the set of supported values has been modified. The old variables have been deprecated and will be removed in a future release.

| --- | --- |
| Old name | New name |
| EDGEDB_TLS_VERIFY_HOSTNAME | EDGEDB_CLIENT_TLS_SECURITY |
| EDGEDB_NO_VERSION_CHECK | EDGEDB_RUN_VERSION_CHECK |
| EDGEDB_SKIP_DOCKER_CHECK | EDGEDB_INSTALL_IN_DOCKER |
| EDGEDB_SERVER_ALLOW_INSECURE_BINARY_CLIENTS | EDGEDB_SERVER_BINARY_ENDPOINT_SECURITY |
| EDGEDB_SERVER_ALLOW_INSECURE_HTTP_CLIENTS | EDGEDB_SERVER_HTTP_ENDPOINT_SECURITY |
| EDGEDB_SERVER_INSECURE_DEV_MODE | EDGEDB_SERVER_SECURITY |
| EDGEDB_SERVER_SKIP_MIGRATIONS | EDGEDB_DOCKER_APPLY_MIGRATIONS |
| EDGEDB_SERVER_GENERATE_SELF_SIGNED_CERT | EDGEDB_SERVER_TLS_CERT_MODE |
| EDGEDB_HIDE_GENERATED_CERT | EDGEDB_DOCKER_SHOW_GENERATED_CERT |

