# v2.0

EdgeDB 2.0 was released on July 28th, 2022. Read the announcement blog post here.

We would like to thank our community for reporting issues and contributing fixes. You are awesome! ❤️

To play with the new features, install the CLI and initialize a new project. For an interesting schema with test data, check out the MCU Sandbox repo.

```bash
$ edgedb project init
```

## Upgrading

Local instances

To upgrade a local project, run the following command inside the project directory.

```bash
$ edgedb project upgrade --to-latest
```

Alternatively, specify an instance name if you aren’t using a project.

```bash
$ edgedb project upgrade --to-latest -I my_instance
```

Hosted instances

To upgrade a remote (hosted) instance, we recommend the following dump-and-restore process.

1. Spin up an empty 2.0 instance by following one of our deployment guides. These guides have been updated to 2.0. Keep the DSN of the newly created instance handy.

If your Postgres cluster is also backing other versions of EdgeDB, make sure you start your new instance with the --ignore-other-tenants option when bootstrapping your new instance.

This process will involve some downtime, specifically during steps 2 and 3. We are working on an in-place upgrade workflow that will reduce the amount of downtime involved and avoid the need to spin up a new instance. We’ll publish that soon; join the Discord for updates. Though for most applications the dump-and-restore workflow will be simpler and less error-prone.

## New features

## Additional changes

## 2.1

## 2.2

## 2.3

## 2.4

## 2.5

## 2.6

## 2.7

## 2.8

## 2.9

## 2.10

## 2.11

## 2.12

## 2.13

## 2.14

## 2.15

## 2.16

