# v3.0

EdgeDB 3.0 was released on June 22nd, 2023. Read the announcement blog post here.

To play with the new features, install the CLI using our installation guide and initialize a new project.

```bash
$ edgedb project init
```

## Upgrading

Local instances

To upgrade a local project, first ensure that your CLI is up to date with edgedb cli upgrade. Then run the following command inside the project directory.

```bash
$ edgedb project upgrade
```

Alternatively, specify an instance name if you aren’t using a project.

```bash
$ edgedb instance upgrade -I my_instance
```

The CLI will first check to see if your schema will migrate cleanly to EdgeDB 3.0.

EdgeDB 3.0 fixes a bug that will cause it to care about the ordering of your ancestors in multiple inheritence. This used to work before 3.0: type A; type B extending A; type C extending A, B; but as of 3.0, the order of ancestors must be changed to match the order of the bases: type A; type B extending A; type C extending B, A; This is a key instance where schemas may be incompatible with 3.0.

If the upgrade check finds any problems, it will report them back to you. If you receive the following error, you will need to check the syntax of your schema:

```default
SchemaError: <some error>
Schema incompatibilities found. Please fix the errors above to proceed.
Hint: For faster feedback loop use:
    edgedb migration upgrade-check --watch
```

You might also receive a different error which indicates the issue is within your migrations. In this case, the error can be fixed by squashing, as indicated by the error:

```default
The current schema is compatible. But some of the migrations are outdated.
Please squash all migrations to fix the issue:
    edgedb migration create --squash
```

Hosted instances

To upgrade a remote (hosted) instance, we recommend the following dump-and-restore process.

If your Postgres cluster is also backing other versions of EdgeDB, make sure you start your new instance with the --ignore-other-tenants option when bootstrapping your new instance.

Pre-1.0 Instances

If you’re still running pre-1.0 EdgeDB instances (e.g., 1.0-beta3) and want to upgrade to 3.0, we recommend you upgrade to version 2.x first, followed by another upgrade to 3.0, both using the same dump-and-restore process.

## New features

## Additional changes

## New release schedule

Unfortunately, the 3.0 release will not include full-text search. We have many requirements for this new API (see the FTS RFC for details), and, while we’ve made significant progress, we have unfortunately run out of time to be 100% sure that it is ready for prime time.

We don’t want this delay to hold back the release of EdgeDB 3.0, which includes many other exciting features that are ready for you to start using right now. That’s why we’ve decided to delay only the FTS feature rather than delaying the entire 3.0 release.

That said we’re working hard to get FTS ready as soon as possible. After the release of 3.0, we’ll be moving to a much more frequent release cycle so that features like FTS can be in your hands as soon as they’re ready.

Going forward, expect EdgeDB releases every four months. These releases will naturally incorporate fewer features than our past releases, but we think the more predictable cadence will be worth it. Every third release starting with 3.0 will be a long-term support (LTS) release. These releases will continue to receive support for a year and a half after their initial release.

## 3.1

## 3.2

## 3.3

## 3.4

## 3.5

## 3.6

