# v4.0

This release cycle is much shorter than the previous ones. It reflects our new approach at EdgeDB where the goal is to provide improvements at a steady regular pace rather than in big, but infrequent batches. Going forward we expect to maintain this shorter release cadence focusing on a few features at a time.

To play with the new features, install the CLI using our installation guide and initialize a new project.

```bash
$ edgedb project init
```

## Upgrading

Local and Cloud instances

To upgrade a local project, first ensure that your CLI is up to date with edgedb cli upgrade. Then run the following command inside the project directory.

```bash
$ edgedb project upgrade
```

Alternatively, specify an instance name if you aren’t using a project.

```bash
$ edgedb instance upgrade -I my_instance
```

The CLI will first check to see if your schema will migrate cleanly to EdgeDB 4.0. If the upgrade check finds any problems, it will report them back to you.

Hosted instances

To upgrade a remote (hosted) instance, we recommend the following dump-and-restore process.

If your Postgres cluster is also backing other versions of EdgeDB, make sure you start your new instance with the --ignore-other-tenants option when bootstrapping your new instance.

## New features

## GraphQL and HTTP authentication

Starting in rc1, the EdgeQL over HTTP and GraphQL endpoints support (and by default require) authentication.

By default, HTTP Basic Authentication is used.

Full details are available in the EdgeQL over HTTP documentation.

This is a backwards-incompatible change. It is possible to opt-in to the old behavior, but not recommended.

## Extensions

## Additional changes

## 4.1

## 4.2

## 4.3

## 4.4

## 4.5

## 4.6

## 4.7

## 4.8

